In this video, I want to train you to identify problems on interface declarations
in places where clashing methods could occur
when using default methods. You cannot define a default method
overriding a public method on java.lang.object.
These methods are equals using an object as an argument,
hashCode, as well as toString.
So, remember that a class method has precedence
over any interface default method,
so even if this was permitted by the compiler,
the default methods would not be usable
by implementing objects
because objects methods would always be invoked
before default methods.
Currently, only one of object's protected methods
can have default methods, clone.
Note that finalize was deprecated in Java 9.
All right, so back to IntelliJ, let's create a new class in our interface methods project.
We'll call this one InterfaceIssues.
Paste in the code.
All right, so this code first
has an interface that defines abstract methods
that match the signatures of java.lang.object public methods,
namely toString equals
where objects pass as an argument and hashCode.
Scrolling down a bit further, we've got ProblemFreeClass
that implements the problem free interface we just talked about.
You can see that it's got a single attribute id
and a single args constructor and it also has concrete methods
for the three methods that we just talked about, toString
equals where objects passed as a parameter and hashCode.
I'm scrolling down still further; we've got another class here
interface issues which extends the problem free class.
You can see it's got one constructor there,
which is a single args constructor and then executes the various methods.
So, let's run this to see what the output looks like.
All right, so far so good. Let's actually add now another interface to this
source file.
I'm going to add it just below our first interface at the top of the file,
so just up here.
You note that by doing that three of the methods
in the interface are producing compiler errors.
toString equals and hashCode and they've all got the same error
default method and whatever the particular method is overrides a member
of java.lang.object.
So, obviously, default methods that are trying to override objects public non-final methods
is not permitted.
So, I'm going to delete those three,
remove those errors and that leaves us with just a single method now
which is a default method for clone.
So, what we're going to do is have a look at our interface issues class,
we're going to add this interface, this problematic interface
being the second one that we pasted in,
and actually implement that for this class. So, here's our interface issues class.
You can see it's extending problem free class,let's implement
the problematic interface.
All right, now this doesn't give an error
in all cases. You can see here that IntelliJ is not flagging that as an error,
and I can actually build the project.
And here now by building it, you can see we've actually got an error.
And the error is on line 68.
You see that over to the bottom right there,
and that's the implements line that I've just added
and the error there is clone in java.lang.object cannot implement clone in
problematic interface attempting to assign weaker access privileges
was public.
It's a bit weird that IntelliJ doesn't pick that up.
You might find that the current version of IntelliJ that you're following along with
may well pick it up, but you can see for me, that's not the case.
But in any case, why is this so?
How can it be that the error on clone is because
we're attempting to assign weaker access privileges?
The clone method and object is protected and it's this method
which the compiler selects to invoke, not the interface method,
the one up here in problematic interface.
And you can see there that the public interface's method is public
because that's the default.
An object's method has weaker privileges protected in this case,
so the privileges are weaker than the method declared
on problematic interface. All right, so leave this error for the moment
and again, weirdly, IntelliJ is not flagging it as an error until we try and run it or build it.
I'll get the same error if I try and run it.
So, we'll leave that error for the moment.
What we're going to do is add a method to our interface problem
free interface, the first interface that we worked on.
So, we're going to paste that down here in our problem free interface.
Okay, so there's our method.
Now that we've done that, we're going to go back to our problem free class
and I'm going to implement a version of the clone method.
You can see that we've got an error now,
a clash there that's because of the method that I've added to our interface,
but we'll go ahead and add a method right down the end of this class.
So, here's the implemented version of clone, which is pretty straightforward,
and now that I've done that what I'm going to do is go back to the main method,
this time for our interface issues class,
I'm actually going to replace a line here.
So, this problem free class line, I'm going to delete that.
I'm going to paste in some code instead.
So, you can see what I’ve added there. We basically added a try catch,
so we're catching the clone not supported exception.
If I run this code now, we should find that it'll all work.
And you can see that we're back to code that is now working.
So, what have I actually done here to fix things?
Well, let's go back in order to see what we did.
We're going back to our interface at the top here, problem free interface.
We added that method and you can see that the public was redundant,
then we went to a problem free class and we created a version of clone
which overrode that.
Again, with a public method making it concrete on the class implementing the interface.
I'm getting back to this one, so when in interface issues which extends problem free class,
the JVM again selects the classes clone method
over the interfaces, the problematic interface,
but this time it finds a match in the class hierarchy that's public,
which is this method here on line 65,
and all as well, that's why I haven't got that weird error that we had until I created
an implementation of the clone method in this,
the problem free class.
So, the rules for default methods overriding public methods
toString equals hashCode on Object is simple:
you cannot do it.
The rules for a default method overriding the protected method clone
are dependent on the class which will implement the interface.
If there's no class in its hierarchy that overrides objects clone method,
you will get a compiler error and we saw that
because the default method is public by default
and clone on object is protected
and you'll get a weaker privileges message,
which you saw in IntelliJ.
Other rules for methods on interfaces are as follows below.
When looking at interfaces on the exam,
ask these questions of the code sample.
I will be going over each of these in code.
Is the interface method static?
Remember that a method is public if it's not private on an interface.
Does the static method override a super interface's default method?
This is not permitted.
Is the method being invoked outside of the interface type
without using the interface type qualifier? Again, this is not permitted.
Is the interface method a default method?
Yes, answers to any of the following questions are compile-time errors.
Does it override any of java.lang.Objects public methods?
Compile-time error.
Does it clash with an unrelated interfaces default method signature
in an implements clause of an implementing class? Again, compile-time error.
And the third compile-time error would be is the default method
being invoked directly in a static context.
Yes would mean compile-time error.
Method selection is prioritized.
Determine which classes are in the hierarchy of the class
where the method is being invoked and what interfaces are in the implements clause?
Remember firstly, a class method is selected first,
the more specific interfaces method is selected next.
If there is a clash, then you must provide an implementation
of the method in the class.
All right, so that's a lot of rules that we've been talking about.
Let's start exploring those and validating those rules in the next video.